A levels-of-analysis framework
for studying social emotions
Social emotions such as guilt and gratitude serve adaptive functions
critical to social interactions and relationships. Therefore, an
ecologically valid approach to studying the psychological and neural
mechanisms of social emotions is to elicit and measure them in social
interactive contexts, where relevant adaptive goals and functions are
salient. However, multiple psychological and neurocognitive processes
might be simultaneously activated during real-time social interactions:
traditional observation-based tasks and self-report measures alone
are not sufcient to capture and dissociate these processes. In this
Perspective, we draw on Marr’s levels-of-analysis framework to argue
that a holistic consideration of the goals and functions of a social
emotion (computation level), formal modelling of its underlying
cognitive operations (algorithm level), and neuroscientifc measures
of the biological bases of these cognitive operations (implementation
level) will aford the theoretical frameworks and methodological tools
necessary to advance understanding of social emotions. To support this
argument, we describe research that showcases the utility of creative
combinations of interactive tasks, neural and behavioural measures,
and computational modelling for advancing understanding of how
social emotions arise and achieve their adaptive goals and functions.
Moral barrier to compassion: How perceived badness of sufferers dampens observers' compassionate responses
Compassion has been theorized as a desirable prosocial emotion due to its potential to transcend arbitrary boundaries (e.g., race, physical distance) and motivate us to alleviate the suffering of all human beings. Our paper nevertheless examines a potential moral barrier to compassion--whether and how moral evaluations of the suffering and the sufferer hinder our compassion and prosocial motivation. In four pre-registered studies (total N = 421, within-participant design), we demonstrated that adult U.S. participants withheld their compassion and willingness to help when they perceived moral badness of the sufferer, even when the perceived moral badness did not directly cause the suffering. The effects were found in terms of diverse types of moral judgments, including the sufferers' immoral intention (e.g., harming another; Study 1), bad moral character (e.g., being a dishonest person; Study 2), and even mere associations with groups perceived as deserving of suffering based on moral status (Studies 3-4). Deservedness judgment--how much the sufferer was viewed as deserving the suffering--mediated the effect between moral judgment and compassionate responses. Importantly, participants judged withholding compassion based on moral deservedness as what should be done and what morally good people would do, suggesting that people hold a normative view of the tendency that might make it difficult to overcome. Our findings thus reveal moral judgment as a barrier that prevents us from alleviating the suffering of all human beings.
Unraveling moral and emotional discourses on social media: a study of three cases
Mounting studies have suggested that messages featuring morality and emotion are more likely to go viral on social media platforms. Our study investigated three controversial events intensely discussed on Weibo (the Chinese equivalent of Twitter), with a focus on the linkage between morality/emotion and social media in a non-Western cultural context. We found (1) more moral content than non-moral content in the online discussion across the three events, (2) no delay of hourly aggregated moral/emotional content between individual posts and media posts, and (3) posts with stronger but heterogeneous emotions attract more retweets, comments, and likes, while homogenous moral foundations in a post can gain more comments and likes but not retweets.
Gratitude Is Morally Sensitive
Helping acts, however well intended and beneficial, sometimes involve immoral means or immoral helpers. Here, we explore
whether help recipients consider moral evaluations in their appraisals of gratitude, a possibility that has been neglected by
existing accounts of gratitude. Participants felt less grateful and more uneasy when offered immoral help (Study 1,
N=150),and when offered morally neutral help by an immoral helper (Study 2,N=172). In response to immoral help or helpers,
participants were less likely to accept the help and less willing to strengthen their relationship with the helper even when
they accepted it. Study 3 (N=276) showed that recipients who felt grateful when offered immoral help were perceived as
less likable, less moral, and less suitable as close relationship partners than those who felt uneasy by observers. Our results
demonstrate that gratitude is morally sensitive and suggest this might be socially adaptive.
Confidence in Moral Decision-Making
Moral decision-making typically involves trade-offs between moral values and self-interest. While previous research on the psychological mechanisms underlying moral decision-making has primarily focused on what people choose, less is known about how an individual consciously evaluates the choices they make. This sense of having made the right decision is known as subjective confidence. We investigated how subjective confidence is constructed across two moral contexts. In Study 1 (240 U.S. participants from Amazon Mechanical Turk, 81 female), participants made hypothetical decisions between choices with monetary profits for themselves and physical harm for either themselves or another person. In Study 2 (369 U.S. participants from Prolific, 176 female), participants made incentive-compatible decisions between choices with monetary profits for themselves and monetary harm for either themselves or another person. In both studies, each choice was followed by a subjective confidence rating. We used a computational model to obtain a trial-by-trial measure of participant-specific subjective value in decision-making and related this to subjective confidence ratings. Across all types of decisions, confidence was positively associated with the absolute difference in subjective value between the two options. Specific to the moral decision-making context, choices that are typically seen as more blameworthy – i.e., causing more harm to an innocent person to benefit oneself – suppressed the effects of increasing profit on confidence, while amplifying the dampening effect of harm on confidence. These results illustrate some potential cognitive mechanisms underlying subjective confidence in moral decision-making and highlighted both shared and distinct cognitive features relative to non-moral value-based decision-making.
The Influence of Cultural and Relational Context on Moral Judgment and Social Emotion
Differences in the link between social trait judgment and socio-emotional experience in neurotypical and autistic individuals
Neurotypical (NT) individuals and individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) make different judgments of social traits from others' faces; they also exhibit different social emotional responses in social interactions. A common hypothesis is that the differences in face perception in ASD compared with NT is related to distinct social behaviors. To test this hypothesis, we combined a face trait judgment task with a novel interpersonal transgression task that induces measures social emotions and behaviors. ASD and neurotypical participants viewed a large set of naturalistic facial stimuli while judging them on a comprehensive set of social traits (e.g., warm, charismatic, critical). They also completed an interpersonal transgression task where their responsibility in causing an unpleasant outcome to a social partner was manipulated. The purpose of the latter task was to measure participants' emotional (e.g., guilt) and behavioral (e.g., compensation) responses to interpersonal transgression. We found that, compared with neurotypical participants, ASD participants' self-reported guilt and compensation tendency was less sensitive to our responsibility manipulation. Importantly, ASD participants and neurotypical participants showed distinct associations between self-reported guilt and judgments of criticalness from others' faces. These findings reveal a novel link between perception of social traits and social emotional responses in ASD.
A dual-route model of social trait perception from face: Dissociating the perceptual and conceptual contributions behaviorally and neurally 
Upon seeing a face, perceivers form social trait impressions of the individual rapidly, which have important social consequences. Prior work has shown that both conceptual and perceptual information associated with a face contributes to social trait perception, but a quantitative dissociation between the two sources has been lacking. Here, we provide behavioral and neuronal evidence for a dual-route model of social trait perception.
We quantitatively characterize 50 celebrities in a GPT-based conceptual space and characterize 500 naturalistic images of these celebrities in a physical space. Specifically, we obtained U.S. news articles related to each of these celebrities from the NOW corpus (2010-2020), and entered these texts to GPT. Each celebrity is thus embedded in a N-dimensional semantic space. The images were selected from a large, normalized database of naturalistic images of celebrities – the CelebA. Each image is characterized by N physical features (e.g., wearing glasses, hair color, etc.). 
We conducted 2 studies to investigate the psychological and neuronal basis of the physical and conceptual processing underlying social impression formation. In Study 1, U.S. participants on Prolific (N = 415) evaluated the naturalistic images of celebrities on 8 social traits: warm, critical, competent, practical, feminine, strong, youthful, and charismatic. In Study 2, 12 neurosurgical patients completed a 1-back task with these images, where they passively viewed these images one at a time and identified if the current one was identical to the immediately preceding one. Altogether 1,658 neurons in the amygdala and hippocampus were recorded from these patients during the 1-back task.
Identity-level representational dissimilarity matrices (RDMs) were constructed based on average trait ratings of each celebrity, and the position of each celebrity in the conceptual, physical, and neuronal response spaces. We found that the variance of all social trait RDMs (Fig. 1a) and the neuronal RDM (Fig. 1b) were explained, uniquely and jointly, by the variances of both the conceptual and the physical RDMs. Moreover, the conceptual variance explained a larger share of variance in both social trait impressions of (Fig. 1c) and neuronal responses to (Fig. 1d) better-known public figures (e.g., Michelle Obama) than lesser-known ones (e.g., Rich Sommer). Furthermore, the geometry of neuronal representations of these public figures modulated how much the conceptual variance explained social trait impressions of them.
These results support a dual-route model of social trait impression formation and underscore the utility of artificial intelligent models in advancing theoretical understanding of person perception.
Living up to it: Investigating the affective and behavioral consequences of social expectation violations
Social expectations are an important part of relationship building and management, yet
little is known about the affective and behavioral consequences of failing to fulfill a social
expectation and the dynamic process of updating a pre-existing social expectation. This
dissertation explores the affective and behavioral consequences of failing to meet social
expectations within intimate relationships, emphasizing how these violations impact relationship
health and dynamics. Utilizing ecological momentary assessment (EMA) approach, the study
examines couples' expectations regarding the division and execution of household work over two
weeks. This method provides insights into the affective responses and behavioral adjustments
resulting from expectation discrepancies. Furthermore, the research delves into the dynamics of
updating social expectations in response to their fulfillment or violation, offering a novel
understanding of these processes through the lens of reinforcement learning theories. By
integrating observational methods with ecological momentary assessments, this study aims to
offer a comprehensive analysis of the immediate and evolving responses to expectation
violations in close relationships. In sum, this proposal will shed light on the mechanism through
which social expectation violations are associated with affective and behavioral consequences,
and have broader implications for the impacts of social expectations on relationship satisfaction
and long-term cooperation.